[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
naga manchetti and charlie state our
headlines today
people living across england find out
this morning if they'll be moved into a
different tier of coronavirus
restrictions
good morning and that means it is crunch
time for tens of thousands of businesses
waiting to hear whether they'll go up to
tier two
i'm in trafford where rates are lower
than the national average
jane says entering tier two would double
revenue overnight
eleven thousand positive covid test
results are left
off the most recent figures in wales in
the latest total could be twice as high
as previously thought 32 years after the
lockerbie bombing
authorities in the united states are
understood to be preparing to charge a
new suspect
good morning liverpool win the biggest
game of the premier league season so
far a late header from roberto firmino
defeats
tottenham and sends liverpool to the top
of the table
marcus rashford's mum mel talks for the
first time about her family's struggle
with poverty and her pride
at her son's campaigning work i had free
jobs
and if i didn't do that we just wouldn't
have been able to cook a pot of food
it's just a bit difficult so marcus is
only telling the story from how he sees
it from
and the words that he's been saying they
obviously come from the bottom of his
heart
good morning the weather today much
quieter than it was yesterday there'd be
a lot more dry conditions
a few showers some sunshine but later
strengthening winds and more rain coming
into the west
i'll have all the details in 10 minutes
[Music]
good morning it's thursday december the
17th our top story is that tens of
millions of people across england
will find out this morning if a change
to local coronavirus restrictions is on
the way
several areas in the north are hoping to
move down
from the strictest tier 3 measures to
tier 2
because of a significant drop in
infection rates however nhs
bosses have warned against easing
restrictions prematurely
simon jones has the story
[Music]
just over a week until christmas the
decorations are up
but for many businesses what sort of
festive period they will have
remains unclear
this hotel in burnley is fully booked
for the big day
but unless the area goes from tier 3 the
highest level of restrictions
into tier 2 nobody will get to stay
it will remain closed we've probably
lost 7 million in sales this year
and the problem is we've no certainty
that we can start to trade again in
january or february or march
many areas of northern england believe
infection rates have come
down enough to justify easing
restrictions
but hospital trusts are warning that
they are still treating a high number of
coronavirus patients
in hornsey on the yorkshire coast
opinion is divided on whether the area
should move
down into tier two no sting tier three
tier three yep safe for everybody it is
without a doubt coastal area like this
people
keep the distance like everybody else is
doing i just talk and pray we do go into
tier two
for safe for the economy and the
industry really
the red areas on the map show the places
that have been in tier three since the
last lockdown ended
already this week london large parts of
essex and parts of hertfordshire have
been added
and towns like hastings on the south
coast where infection rates have risen
by 140 percent in the past week
fear they're heading the same way tier
one
was manageable we could actually manage
to work with that
where people could meet up and be
sociable but in a controlled way
but tier two has been very difficult and
tier three will be awful but
at least we'll know what we're doing
government officials met last night to
decide
their conclusions will be revealed today
simon jones bbc news
let's talk to our correspondent tim
muffet who's in crawley this morning
morning
tim so crawley currently in tier two
concerns about moving into tier three
yeah that's right good morning to you
crawley in west sussex as you say in
tier two now here infection rates more
than doubled in the week up to
december the 9th so real concern that
this could potentially
be moved into tier 3 worthing also in
west sussex a similar
rate of increase and those are the sort
of things the government says it's going
to look at when deciding
whether to move one place into another
tier along with
the age groups of those particularly
affected and also
the pressure on local nhs trusts worth
recapping of course
greater london parts of hartford genesis
yesterday
moved from tier two to tier three so
those tougher restrictions
already in place there and as we saw in
the report there are many places
which hope they will be reduced from
tier three to tier two potentially
greater manchester for example
andy burnham the mayor there saying
there's a very strong case
for that to happen there are some places
herefordshire for example where
there are low infection rates and there
are hopes and
some thoughts that could be moved down
into tier one so we're going to have to
wait and see now
in terms of the time frame we expect an
announcement from 11
30 matt hancock who thought we'll
address parliament and then
if there are changes they'll kick in
from december the 19th that's
saturday but bear in mind there's only
going to be in place for a few days
before the christmas relaxations kick in
over the christmas period which will
allow three households to mix
and then on the 28th of december the
tears will then
kick back in so potential changes we're
going to have to wait and see
a lot of people paying close attention
because this could have a very
very big effect over the christmas
period tim it certainly will thanks very
much we should say this morning as well
we're going to be talking a lot about
the tier system
that announcement coming later this
morning about 11 30 matt hancock i think
is in the comments but we're going to be
talking to pretty patel um we're going
to be talking to andy burnham um who's
looking after to go to manchester of
course
and we'll be talking to mark drakeford
as well first minister of wales
also got experts of course we have
experts little later on this morning
tempar state if you've got questions you
still remain unanswered in your head
there's no such thing
as a stupid question at the moment
because almost everyone is asking the
same things one way or another so
keep those coming to us we will try and
do our best to answer all of those for
you time now six minutes past six
11 000 positive coveted tests have been
left off the official figures in wales
meaning the number of cases for the week
to tuesday could be twice as high
as previously thought public health
wales has blamed the error
on planned maintenance of some of its
i.t systems
more than a hundred thousand people have
tested positive in the country since the
pandemic began
in the additional cases will make up
more than
10 of the new total the conservatives
called the news staggering
authorities in the united states are
believed to be close to filing charges
against a libyan man suspected of making
the bomb
which blew up pan am flight 103 over
locally in 1988.
us media says prosecutors will soon
press for the extradition of
abu aguira muhammad who is reportedly
being held in libya is our washington
correspondent
libo deseka 270 people were killed in
the terror attack over the scottish town
which took place just days before
christmas
all 259 people on the flight were killed
most of them were americans returning
home for the christmas holidays
a large section of the plane's fuselage
fell to the ground destroying homes and
killing a further 11 people
the suspect is said to be a libyan
intelligence officer by the name of abu
aguilar mohammed masood
he's alleged to have helped build the
bomb that brought the plane down
the victims families have found
themselves caught up in one of the
world's longest
and most sprawling terrorism
investigations
masood is a long-time suspect in this
case he's said to have been the subject
of discussions among u.s and foreign
officials since at least
2015. it's not clear though what the
likelihood is of him being brought to
the u.s for trial
neither the u.s justice department nor
the libyan authorities have publicly
commented on the issue
so far only one man libyan abdel basset
al-magrahi
has been sent to prison for the bombing
he was convicted in 2001
but subsequently allowed to return home
after it emerged that he had terminal
cancer
he died in 2012. lebuduseko
bbc news washington a chinese spacecraft
has returned to earth with the first
samples from the moon
in more than 40 years the robot craft
which didn't have any crew on board
spent three weeks in space gathering
rocks and soil
capsule carrying the samples touched out
in the northern region
of inner mongolia earlier scientists
hope the material will help them
understand more about the structure
and history of the moon chinese flag was
planted
on the lunar surface that's not the
lunar surface because there's people
walking around without any space suits
either so just
just to be clear they didn't break all
sorts of precedence and uh
no i kind of looked up and thought loads
of people there
that was in mongolia that's definitely
good space
and clear that up glad you did very rare
to find new plants and fungi in the new
uk but a humble toadstool growing by
heathrow
has topped the list of kew gardens
discoveries from around the world
so most new species are from remote
parts the rainforest but this
toadstool was discovered by chance on a
walk
by heathrow airport other highlights on
the list include this orchid dubbed the
ugliest
in the world that can't be that one it
must be the picture before
that picture before looked like um an
alien didn't it you know the film alien
whereas that thing we just saw at the
end there well i'm sorry whatever that
was look lovely
very but very i don't think you should
dub anything ugly
no ever should you carol good point
morning
good morning good morning to you too
we'll swiftly move on
the weather today is much quieter than
it was yesterday we're in between two
systems
and we've got a little ridge across the
uk a little ridge of high pressure
so today bright and breezy now for some
it's a little bit cooler than it was
yesterday but currently across the south
coast
for example temperatures are still
around 10 degrees
today there'll be a lot of dry weather
there'll be a fair bit of sunshine as
well just
one or two showers it's later on in the
day we see the cloud thicken out towards
the west
and then showery rain will arrive and
the wind will start to pick up
particularly so in the evening
through the irish sea these are our
daytime temperatures
9 to about 13 degrees so
through the evening the wind will really
strengthen across the irish sea and
areas adjacent to it
and the rain moves from the west towards
the east
with some heavy bursts as well there'll
be a lot of
low cloud hill fog across the moors in
through wales cumbria and the southern
uplands tonight as well
but as we go through the night after an
early dip in temperatures the
temperatures will actually arise
and if you look at these they're not too
dissimilar to what we are looking at
during the day for some
they'll be higher so once again we've
got this range 9
to 13 degrees through the course of
tomorrow well we'll start off with all
that hill fog there'll be some cloud
around as well
and then we've got our next system
coming in from the west
this is likely to produce some heavy
rain particularly across southwest
england and wales as you can see from
the
flashes of green in there it's falling
and already saturated ground so it could
lead to some issues with flooding
and these black circles represent the
strength of wind gusts you can expect so
it's also going to be quite a windy day
again
especially with exposure through the
irish sea in the southeastern corner
we're looking at a fair bit of cloud we
could see some drizzle from that
and the rain continuing across parts of
scotland away from the northeast but
here it will be pretty windy
temperatures tomorrow 10 to about 14
degrees
but somewhere for example northeast
wales we could see even a 15
way above average for this stage in
december charlie and naga
it's warm isn't it it is very mild very
mild tomorrow but then as we head into
the weekend
it's going to turn cooler again with
temperatures closer to average not
particularly cold just cooler than this
you're going to tell us more in about
half an hour i know you are thanks very
much carol
let's see tom knows 12 minutes past six
we're going to have a look at this
morning's papers
for you thursday morning what's in the
papers the independent reports
on that landmark ruling the pollution
contributed to the death
of nine-year-old ella kissy debra in
2013.
this comes after a long campaign by
ella's mom rosamund who we're going to
be speaking to
in just a few minutes time now many of
the papers
are looking at the relaxation of rules
over christmas due to begin next week
the daily mail describes the prime
minister's comments on having
little christmas as a partial u-turn and
that families are being asked to
drastically cut back their christmas
plans
the time scotland highlights the
different approaches the nations are now
taking the festive season it reports the
first minister nicola sturgeon
is begging scottish people to stay home
this christmas
and the duke and duchess of cambridge
have realised they're released their
annual christmas card
showing the couple with their children
in the grounds of anmer hall
have a look at some of the inside
stories for you now a winter classic
winter comfort food is featuring yeah
i'm actually a little bit disappointed
with having to do this story because you
know what we need some joy and for me
food brings complete joy so i don't need
to hear that one of my favorite things
although i do like pikelets or picklets
i'm not sure how you pronounce them
pikelets here we go which have flatter
versions of crumpets
um but crumpets this story now says that
crumpets
um have loads and loads of salt one can
have um just one crumpet can have .81
grams which is almost the same as
two small portions of um fries
from a leading fast food chain or two
slices of white is that with or without
adornment
without adult without adornment so the
recommendation the nutritionist at
action on salt says that um
you could try different healthier
toppings
no added salt peanut butter we'll eat it
with a scrambled egg to make one crumpet
more substantial
now i i don't think you could ever eat
just one crumpet could you that's the
problem the crumpets are more than one
item lashings of butter what's your
favorite topping for crumpet
well butter i know uh in the piece they
talk about marmite and
is it peanut but some people have peanut
butter on which doesn't really appeal to
cheese
cheese yeah cheese cheese for me i think
people eat them anyway and it's one of
those things isn't it it's a bit it's
kind of winter comfort food
it's one of those things in moderation
enjoy
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc
dot co dot uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with bbc
news